---
title: Essay 1
layout: about
permalink: /essay-01.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# Rough Draft - Women and Their Labor
Throughout the centuries women have been subjugated and exploited, their labor consistently devalued.  This was still very much the case at the dawn of the twentieth century.  Women were denied suffrage, largely contained to domestic work, and treated more like property than human beings.  In the history of the United States, women’s rights activists were largely maligned, even by similarly subjugated groups.  The first half of the century marked the beginning of a large societal change in regard to women’s autonomy and ability to choose (and vote) for themselves.  While they still faced an uphill battle, things like suffrage, the ability to enter the workforce, or participate in politics, meant that women had more opportunities than ever before in the United States.  In this paper we will explore how changing attitudes and important historical events intertwined to create a society that was on the trend towards gender equality, even if there was still a long way to go. 
	At the beginning of the twentieth century women were not allowed to vote.  While historically this had been the status quo for a long time, there was a growing faction of society that was pressing for women’s suffrage.  While this movement consisted of mostly women, there were also men who believed in women’s right to suffrage and they did support and advocate for the movement.  Additionally, abolitionist and feminist movements tended to have a lot of overlap historically speaking, as they were seeking a similar level of equality (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  While slavery was a travesty of epic proportions that had taken advantage of Africans and African Americans for a couple centuries in the United States, women were also held in a kind of domestic slavery for centuries as well and denied certain rights and liberties that were readily available to white men.  This gave abolitionists and women’s rights groups a level of common ground, leading them to support each other’s movements to some extent.  That being said, at the dawn of the twentieth century, African American men were granted 3/5 of a vote, while women were still barred from the polls completely (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  Thus, the first major societal movement for women in this century began to ramp up dramatically.  Multiple groups such as the National Woman's Party (NWP), and the National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA) began to campaign in earnest for suffrage and they were not taking no for an answer, despite how many men wanted them to (WP 2022).  President Woodrow Wilson was one of these men.  The day before his inauguration as he got off the train, he was shocked to see no one was waiting for him as they were all at a women’s march a few blocks over (Harris & Ewing 1914).  Wilson, who would normally have described himself as shy was definitely not shy about his disdain for women in politics, explicitly stating that he felt a “chilled, scandalized feeling that always comes over me when I see and hear women speak in public,” (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  With the disdain of the president clear, women’s groups were fighting an uphill political battle for suffrage from the beginning of the century. 
	After the outbreak of World War I, Wilson continued to avoid granting women suffrage, citing the need to focus on the war above all else.  Leaders of the NWP and NWSA capitulated and agreed not to press the issue of suffrage until after the war was over, with the understanding that Wilson would be more willing to work with them if they did this.  The fact that many states had individually begun to grant women suffrage was also a boon to their cause as they felt this acceptance lent their fight more credence, credence that the president, ultimately, could no longer ignore (National Photo Co. 1919).  After the conclusion of the war, Wilson kept his promise and supported the ratification of the nineteenth amendment.  This was not without the significant effort that women like Alice Paul and Carrie Chapman Catt poured into the cause, in some instances going on hunger strikes, marching excessively, and tirelessly working on political campaigns.  Here are just a few pictures that exemplify this arduous task.  Finally, in 1920 women were granted the right to vote.  This legislative decision came down to just one single vote, by Harry Thomas Burn, who after voting no twice, was, as poetically as it might sound, influenced by his own mother to vote yes (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  The United States had existed for 150 years before it finally granted women the right to participate politically.  
	Women’s suffrage was far from the only inhibition that the female gender faced in the American sphere however, paid labor was also a significant handicap for women looking to make their own way in the world.  Women worked primarily in the domestic sector for most of history, with a huge majority having never been employed outside of the home (Sawaya 2003).  Women were foremost homemakers and in charge of the production and care of children.  When they did work outside the home, which was not often, it was still usually within the domestic sphere such as childcare, sewing, or laundry.  The onset of World War I began to change this however, as thousands of men went off to fight, leaving a labor vacuum that needed to be filled as quickly as possible.  In 1910 only about twenty five percent of women held a job outside the home, this number increased during the first World War, but quickly dropped again after the war ended and the men returned home and demanded their jobs back, leaving women who had just gained the right to vote almost back where they started (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  With the onset of the Great Depression, employment dropped drastically among all sectors of society and while a small recovery was made under Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR), ultimately the boon to employment rates for both men and women was the second World War.  By 1945, there were eighteen million women in the workforce, many of them working for the defense industry (Sawaya 2003).  Because of a combination of factors, i.e. their husbands being out of the country and making their own money and being in sole control of it for the first time in their lives, women experienced a higher level of autonomy and freedom in the United States than they had ever had before.  
	At the close of the war, men returned and sought to take their jobs back.  Unions facilitated these demands, and a percentage of women did lose their employment, however, many women kept their jobs and continued to make a living and work outside the home (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  This afforded women opportunities that had never been available for them before.  They could support themselves and their families without a man, allowing some women to choose not to marry or even to leave a partner who had been abusive to them.  Obviously, this was not a panacea, but it was a stark improvement for women and their ability to make their own choices and live their own lives.  
	Finally, over the first half of the twentieth century, women were able to enter the political sphere and advocate not only for themselves, but for improvements in society as whole.  Urban planning was a heavy focus as cities were unorganized and essentially cesspools of garbage, human waste, and disease (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  This was something that women could address without heavy male backlash as it was viewed as an extension of the domestic sphere they already operated within.  Additionally, women could run for office, and with the passage of their right to vote, they could vote for their fellow women (although this did not always happen, as most women voted along the same party lines as their husbands).  The Roosevelts were instrumental in allowing women to participate in politics as Eleanor was incredibly active in the political sphere and FDR appointed the first woman to ever serve in a presidential cabinet, Frances Perkins (Gilmore & Sugrue 2015).  Perkins was instrumental during the New Deal and the helped author the Social Security Act, as she had the practical knowledge and experience to turn FDR’s vague dreams into a concrete reality.  Perkins served for more than twelve years as the Secretary of Labor and accomplished a myriad of things that women would have never even been given the opportunity to decades or ever years before (Breiseth 1966).  Like many women throughout history who dared to step outside their socially accepted bounds, she faced her fair share of criticism and harassment, once even braving tomatoes and eggs being thrown at her during a speech.  Despite this, she carried on as if nothing had happened, stating after it was over “that’s politics,” (Breisith 1966).  Because of her bravery, and the bravery of so many women like her, politics slowly became more acceptable for women to participate in.  This shift was also due to a few key men who respected women enough to allow them in the political arena in the first place.  While there was still much progress to be made, it was undoubtedly a historical moment for gender equality.  
	In conclusion, the first half of the twentieth century was a turning point for women’s rights.  They gained the right to suffrage, after many decades of campaigning, protests, and even jail time.  They were allowed to work outside the home in greater numbers than ever before, allowing them an independence they have never known before, and they were finally allowed into the political sphere in a way that they never had been before.  While there was still much progress to be made, had these important events not taken place women would still be subjugated, we owe these brave women of the early twentieth century more than we know.  


